---
title: calendar
layout: page
---


## Week 1 -- Introduction

Thursday, August 19, 2021

**Read:**

* Syllabus and Course Website

## Week 2 -- History and Theory I

Tuesday, August 24, 2021

We start this week by examining assumptions we often make about the
relationship between the past and the present. It is not uncommon for people to
imagine the present as better than the past, particularly given the rapid
technological changes of the last 150 years. Walter Benjamin asks us to examine
such assumptions, that History is a story of progress, as well as what the
obligations of the present are to the past. This is a curious reading. Treat it
like a puzzle, and see if you can unlock Benjamin's claims.

**Read:**

* Walter Benjamin, “Theses on the Philosophy of History,” Illuminations (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2019).

Bring to class a list of categories and concepts divided into two columns:
HISTORICISM and HISTORICAL MATERIALISM. As you read Benjamin’s text, add any
concepts, keywords, or categories to one of these two columns. Historicism here
is what Benjamin associates with progress, history-as-progress, etc.

Thursday, August 26, 2021

**Read:**

* Joan Wallach Scott, "Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis" *The
  American Historical Review* 91, no. 5 (1986): 1053-075.

As you read this article, consider how Scott defines gender. Is gender as
a category of historical analysis essentially women's history? If not, how does
it differ? Take notes on the reading and be ready to discuss in class.


## Week 3 -- History and Theory II

This week we will continue thinking about larger historical questions in
relation to theory and methodology.

Tuesday, August 31, 2021

**Read:**

* Jeanne Boydston, "Gender as a Question of Historical Analysis," *Gender
  & History* 20.3 (Nov 2008): 558-583.

How does Boydston, writing in 2008, differ from Scott writing some twenty years
before?

Thursday, September 2, 2021

**Read:**

* Pete Sigal, "Latin America and the Challenge of Globalizing the History of
  Sexuality," *The American Historical Review* Volume 114, Issue 5 (December
  2009), 1340–1353.

**Due:** Write a 1 page reaction to the last two weeks of reading, drawing from
our discussions of History, Gender, and Sexuality. What do you see as the most
difficult challenges in doing the history of gender and sexuality? 

## Week 4 -- Before the Conquest I

Over the next few weeks we will compare how three pre-conquest societies were
organized by gendered systems- the Inca, the Mexica, and the Spanish. Pay close
attention to the metaphors by which gendered roles were understood. How did
mythologies, family, sexuality, work, etc. expressed in gendered terms? What do
those terms tell us about normative expectations and their differences in the
three societies?

Tuesday, September 7, 2021

**Read:**

* *Handbook of Inca Mythology*, pp 1-28.

Thursday, September 9, 2021

**Read:**

* Frank Salomon, "Indian Women of Early Colonial Quito as Seen Through Their
  Testaments," *The Americas* 44:3 (Jan. 1988), 325-341.

* Selections from Guaman Poma de Ayala, *El Primer Nuevo Crónica y Buen
  Gobierno*, Trans. John V. Murra, et. al. Mexico: Siglo Veintiuno, 1992
  [1615]. Text and drawings.

**Due:** Write a research memo on Salomon's article. Instructions for how to
write a research memo are available
[here](https://chadblack.net/LatAmSport2019/memo/).

## Week 5 -- Before the Conquest II

Tuesday, September 14, 2021

**Read:**

* Schroeder et. al. Chapters 1, 2, 5.

Thursday, September 16, 2021

**Read:**

* Rosemary Joyce, "Gender, Performance, Power, and Reproduction" and "Becoming
  Human: Body and Person in Aztec Tenochtitlan," in *Gender and Power in
  Prehispanic Mesoamerica* (Austin: University of Texas, 2000).

**Due:** Write a one page reaction paper to the week's readings. Can you
identify parallels between the chapters in Schroeder and Joyce? 

## Week 6 Before the Conquest III

Tuesday, September 21, 2021

What distinguishes practice and prescription in early-modern Spanish societies?
Are prescriptive norms historically more significant than popular norms?

**Read:**

* Poska, Allyson. 1996. "When Love Goes Wrong: Getting out of Marriage in
   Seventeenth-Century Spain," Journal of Social History 29.4: 873-882.

or, 

* Behrend-Martinez, Edward. "Manhood and the Neutered Body in Early Modern
   Spain." Journal of Social History 38, no. 4 (2005): 1073-1093.


Thursday, September 23, 2021

**Read:**

* Taylor, Scott. "Credit, Debt, and Honor in Castile, 1600-1650" Journal of
  Early Modern History 7:1-2 (January 2003), 8-27.

**Due:** Choose one of this week's readings and write a research memo on the
article.

## Week 7 -- Fall Break

**Due:** Topic and preliminary bibliography for your final paper. 

## Week 8 -- The Colonial Crucible I

In the 16th and 17th centuries, new societies were forged in a crucible of
conquest, disease, labor, and politics. How were men and women differentially
affected by these shifts? 

Tuesday, October 5, 2021

**Read:**

* Schroeder, et.al., Chapters 3-4

Thursday, October 7, 2021

**Read:**

* Schroeder, et.al., Chapter 7

**Due:** Write a 1 page reaction to this week's readings.


## Week 9 -- The Colonial Crucible II

Tuesday, October 12, 2021

**Read:**

* Karen B. Graubart, "'Women were governing before the Spanish entered this
  kingdom": The Institutionalization of the Cacica from the North Coast of
  Peru," pp. 139-164 in Ochoa and Guengerich, editors, *Cacicas: The Indigenous
  Women Leaders of Spanish America, 1492-1825* (Norman: University of Oklahoma
  Press, 2021).

Thursday, October 14, 2021

**Read:**

* Lane, Kris. Captivity and Redemption: Aspects of Slave Life in Early
  Colonial Quito and Popayan." The Americas 57:2 (Oct. 2000), 225-246.

**Due:** Research memo on either the Lane or Graubart pieces.

## Week 10 -- Marriage and Family

Tuesday, October 19, 2021

**Read:**

* Socolow, Susan Migden. "Permission to Marry: Eighteenth-Century Matrimonial
  Files." In Colonial Lives: Documents on Latin American History, 1550-1850,
  ed. Richard Boyer and Geoffrey Spurling. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 2000
  (236-248).

Thursday, October 21, 2021

**Due:** Research memos on 4 of your paper sources.

## Week 11 -- The Religious Option

There were formal and informal forms of spiritual power for men and women in
the colonial period. Why were they chosen? How were they pursued? Who did they
threaten?

Tuesday, October 26, 2021

**Read:**

* Behar, Ruth. “Sexual Witchcraft, Colonialism, and Women’s Powers: Views from
  the Mexican Inquisition.” In Sexuality and Marriage in Colonial Latin
  America, ed. Asunción Lavrin. Lincoln: Univ. of Nebraska Press, 1992
  (178-206). 

Thursday, October 28, 2021

**Read:**

* van Deusen, Nancy E. "Defining the Sacred and the Worldly: Beatas and
  Recogidas in Late-Seventeenth-Century Lima." Colonial Latin American
  Historical Review 6:4 (Fall 1997).

* Holler, Jacqueline. "The Spiritual and Physical Ecstasies of a
  Sixteenth-Century Beata: Marina de San Miguel Confesses Before the Mexican
  Inquisition." In Colonial Lives, Documents on Latin American History,
  1550-1850, ed. Richard Boyer and Geoffrey Spurling. New York: Oxford Univ.
  Press, 2000 (77-100).

**Due:** Write a 1 page response to the case of Marina de San Miguel.

## Week 12 -- Sexuality and Society I

We will approach a general discussion of sexuality across the colonial period
by considering the acts that the church and state punished as "unnatural." What
is the significance of "natural" and "unnatural" in organizing power in
society? Which defines the other? What do we learn about daily life by reading
cases on the most extreme expressions of sexual desire in the colonial period? 

Tuesday, November 2, 2021

**Read:**

* Tortorici, Introduction and Chapter 1.

Thursday, November 4, 2021

**Read:**

* Tortorici, Chapters 2 and 3.

**Due:** One-page reaction paper to the first half of the book.

## Week 13 -- Sexuality and Society II

Tuesday, November 9, 2021

**Read:**

* Tortorici, Chapters 4 and 5.

Thursday, November 11, 2021

**Read:**

* Tortorici, Chapter 6 and Conclusion.

**Due:** One-page reaction paper to the second half of the book.

## Week 14 -- The 18th Century Reaction

The 18th century was an age of reactionary family politics under the guise of
enlightened reform. How did the Age of Enlightenment in colonial Spanish
America represent one step forward, two steps back? How did some religious
figures express this reaction in new approaches to pregnancy and the fetus? How
did the reformist state use sexuality as a location to discipline society and
to what ends?

Tuesday, November 16, 2021

**Read:**

* *Baptism Through Incision: The Postmortem Cesarean Operation in the Spanish
  Empire* 41-93.


Thursday, November 18, 2021

**Read:**

* Black, Chad. "Negotiating Adultery in Bourbon Quito," *Routledge Reader on
  Colonialism and Sexuality*. London: Routledge Press, 2021.

**Due:** Write a one-page response to Baptism through Incision. Consider how
this treatise was politically reactionary.

## Week 15 -- Thanksgiving

Tuesday, November 23, 2021

No class, but your historiography paper is due.

Thursday, November 25, 2021

## Week 16 -- Wrap it up

Tuesday, November 30, 2021 

A final discussion on the semester. What relevance does early modern gender and
sexuality have to today?

**Final self-evaluation due December 7th.**
